Add DR scenario for multiple active server setup (#3726)
theforeman/foreman-documentation: guides/common/modules/proc_preparing-for-disaster-recovery-with-two-active-project-servers.adoc

[id="preparing-for-disaster-recovery-with-two-active-project-servers"]
= Preparing for disaster recovery with two active {ProjectServer}s

Create a second {ProjectServer} by restoring a backup of your first {ProjectServer}.
Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content, such as repositories or host configuration, does not drift apart over time.

.Procedure
. Back up your {ProjectServer}.
For more information, see xref:backing-up-{project-context}-server-and-{smart-proxy-context}_admin[].
. Restore the backup on a system that will serve as your other {ProjectServer}.
For more information, see xref:restoring-{project-context}-server-or-{smart-proxy-context}-from-a-backup_admin[].
+
[NOTE]
====
Each server must have a distinct hostname and IP address.
This enables you to re-register hosts if one of the servers fails.
====
. Ensure that content on your servers remains consistent:
** If you want both servers to act as sources for synchronization and content view creation, follow these guidelines to prevent content drift:

> *** Regularly synchronize repositories on both servers.

Reviewer: Recommend use of Ansible collection?

Author: We have a link at the end of the procedure pointing to Foreman Ansible docs. I'm adding `redhat.satellite.repository_sync` and `redhat.satellite.sync_plan` as an extra tip here.

For more information, see {ContentManagementDocURL}[Synchronizing repositories] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.
*** Ensure that content views on both servers match.
// *** What else?

> ** If you want only one server to manage synchronization and content views and let the other server synchronize its content from the first server, configure Inter-Server Synchronization (ISS).

Reviewer: A strategy we can mention here is to have a single source of truth that is only handling content view definitions, and then each server is syncing from it. This adds complexity but it splits the roles up and can help:

```
     |--- Satellite for CVs only ---|
               /                               \
             /                                   \
           /                                       \
|--Satellite for Hosts --|     |--Satellite for hosts--|
```

Author: Ok, I did my best and added this as a third option.

Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content, such as repositories or host configuration, does not drift apart over time.

.Procedure
. Back up your {ProjectServer}.
For more information, see xref:backing-up-{project-context}-server-and-{smart-proxy-context}_admin[].
. Restore the backup on a system that will serve as your other {ProjectServer}.
For more information, see xref:restoring-{project-context}-server-or-{smart-proxy-context}-from-a-backup_admin[].
+
[NOTE]
====
Each server must have a distinct hostname and IP address.
This enables you to re-register hosts if one of the servers fails.
====
. Ensure that content on your servers remains consistent:
* If you want both servers to manage content synchronization and content view creation, follow these guidelines to prevent content drift:
** Regularly synchronize repositories on both servers.
For more information, see {ContentManagementDocURL}[Synchronizing repositories] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.
You can use the following Ansible modules to automate repository synchronization: `{ansible-namespace}.repository_sync` and `{ansible-namespace}.sync_plan`.

> ** Ensure that content views on both servers match.

Author: How?

Reviewer: 1. Use ISS if the disaster recovery site has network access to the primary
2. Use import-export if there is disconnection between the two
3. Use the dedicated content server approach in either case if a single source of truth is desired, with dedicated control by a system admin that owns the SOE.

Author: Added to appropriate places in the existing steps.

* If you want one server to manage content synchronization and content view creation, you can configure Inter-Server Synchronization (ISS) so that the other server synchronizes its content from the first server.
For more information, see {ContentManagementDocURL}Synchronizing_Content_Between_Servers_content-management[Synchronizing content between {ProjectServer}s] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.

> * If you want one server to manage only content view creation but not content synchronization, you can configure the other server or multiple other servers to import content views from the first server but synchronize content from repositories.

Author: How? Should we link to the ISS docs here as well? Or is this handled differently than with ISS?

Author: Obsolete now.

//      |------------ Satellite for CVs only ---------------|
//                /                               \
//              /                                   \
//            /                                       \
// |--Satellite for Hosts --|     |--Satellite for hosts--|
. Register hosts to your servers so that each server manages hosts in its respective data center.

> . Automate running the `{foreman-maintain} health check` command on both servers.

Author: Should we mention an Ansible module here too? Or is there another way to automate this?

Reviewer: There is no Ansible for it - user should opt to just use whatever they have, so I'd leave this as is.

Author: Ok, no change.

The health check verifies whether the servers remain fully operational.

.Verification
Perform this test in an isolated staging environment:

. Mimic a full outage on one of your servers.
To verify that the server is inaccessible, you can turn the machine off, halt the virtual machine (VM) if your server runs on a VM, or isolate the machine by using a firewall.
. Verify that your `{foreman-maintain} health check` automation reported an error.
. Re-register all hosts from the inaccessible server to the other server.

> . Verify that hosts have been properly re-registered.

Author: How?

Reviewer: Great question. I don't have a great answer.

Author: Fair enough, no change.

[id="preparing-for-disaster-recovery-with-two-active-project-servers"]
= Preparing for disaster recovery with two active {ProjectServer}s

Create a second {ProjectServer} by restoring a backup of your first {ProjectServer}.

> Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content, such as repositories or host configuration, does not drift apart over time.

Reviewer 2: question (non-blocking): Can we reword "their content, such as repositories or host configuration"?

We typically refer to "content" as synchronized packages and configuration objects such as Ansible roles. Host configuration, such as "host 1 is part of host group A" etc. is IMHO not really "content" but rather "configuration".

```suggestion
Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content and configuration, such as repositories or host configuration, does not drift apart over time.
```

I am unsure if my suggestion makes it easier to read. Maybe split into two:
```suggestion
Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content and configuration does not drift apart over time.
This includes all content, host configuration, and {Project} configuration.
```

I think it also includes installed plugins, manually uploaded RPM/deb packages, etc. and is probably not easy to track unless you configure Foreman/Katello only by using API/Ansible so that you can reproduce this on your second Foreman/Katello instance.

> Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content, such as repositories or host configuration, does not drift apart over time.

Author: We might also want to stick with "content" only. We get a little bit more specific in the procedure below and based on that, I'd say "content" is enough here.

```suggestion
Configure both servers to operate independently in their respective data centers, but ensure that their content does not drift apart over time.
```

.Procedure
. Back up your {ProjectServer}.
For more information, see xref:backing-up-{project-context}-server-and-{smart-proxy-context}_admin[].

> . Restore the backup on a system that will serve as your other {ProjectServer}.

Reviewer 2: I like "secondary" in favor of "other", but your call. Checking the currently built docs did not help me make a recommentation, though I'd appreciate consistency.

Out of scope & your call.

Author: Elsewhere, we are using "disaster recovery site/server" and "primary site/server". I think that could work pretty well. +1 on consistency, that's something I definitely should look into as well.

Author: You know what, looking at it more closely now, this probably won't work after all. This is a scenario for `two active servers`. They should both be more or less equal to each other (with the exception of how to ensure content sync, as described in this procedure). So I'll stick with "other" here.

For more information, see xref:restoring-{project-context}-server-or-{smart-proxy-context}-from-a-backup_admin[].
+
[NOTE]
====
Each server must have a distinct hostname and IP address.
This enables you to re-register hosts if one of the servers fails.
====
. Ensure that content on your servers remains consistent:
* If you want both servers to manage content synchronization and content view creation, follow these guidelines to prevent content drift:
** Regularly synchronize repositories on both servers.
You can use the following Ansible modules to automate repository synchronization: `{ansible-namespace}.repository_sync` and `{ansible-namespace}.sync_plan`.
** Ensure that content views on both servers match.
* If you want one server to manage content synchronization and content view creation, use one of these features to prevent content drift:

> ** If your disaster recovery site has network access to your primary site, use Inter-Server Synchronization (ISS) to ensure your disaster recovery server synchronizes its content from the primary server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
** If your disaster recovery site has network access to your primary site, use {ISS} (ISS) to ensure your disaster recovery server synchronizes its content from the primary server.
```
blocking: Refs https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/blob/master/guides/common/attributes-base.adoc#L89 and https://github.com/theforeman/foreman-documentation/blob/master/guides/common/attributes-satellite.adoc#L85

** If your disaster recovery site does not have network access to your primary site, synchronize content by using export and import.
* If you want one server to manage only content view creation but not content synchronization, you can configure the other server or multiple other servers to import content views from the first server but synchronize content from repositories.

> //      |------------ Satellite for CVs only ---------------|
> //                /                               \
> //              /                                   \
> //            /                                       \
> // |--Satellite for Hosts --|     |--Satellite for hosts--|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
//      |------------ Foreman/Katello for CVs only ---------------|
//                /                               \
//              /                                   \
//            /                                       \
// |--Foreman/Katello for Hosts --|     |--Foreman/Katello for hosts--|
```

not blocking! :)

> . Register hosts to your servers so that each server manages hosts in its respective data center.

Reviewer 2: This is ambigous in my eyes. Users should register all hosts in data center 1 to Foreman/Katello in DC1; and all hosts in DC2 to Foreman/Katello in DC2.

AFAIK there is no other way than doing it like this unless you have two Foreman/Katello or Smart Proxy Servers that manage hosts in the same network. I don't know if that's a good idea.

@ehelms Can you please ACK line 32 or do you suggest to reword it in some way?

Reviewer: That re-wording you suggest is more specific, and I think we can go that way. I tend to like "should" language in this scenario to denote best practice but not hard requirement.

Author: The word "should" might trigger peer reviewers or, worse, the Vale linter. How about we add the more specific wording as an example that extends the current line 32? Does the latest version work for you @maximiliankolb @ehelms?

Reviewer 2: I like line 32+33 :+1:

. Automate running the `{foreman-maintain} health check` command on both servers.
The health check verifies whether the servers remain fully operational.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.Verification
Perform this test in an isolated staging environment:

. Mimic a full outage on one of your servers.
To verify that the server is inaccessible, you can turn the machine off, halt the virtual machine (VM) if your server runs on a VM, or isolate the machine by using a firewall.
. Verify that your `{foreman-maintain} health check` automation reported an error.

> . Re-register all hosts from the inaccessible server to the other server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Register the hosts of the inaccessible server to the other server.
```
I recommend this wording because "re-register ... from" sounds strange.

Author: As explained above, I'm keeping "re-register". No change.

> . Verify that hosts have been properly re-registered.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Verify that the hosts are properly registered to the accessible server.
```

Author: I'm adding "accessible".

. Perform these verification checks regularly.

.Additional resources
* Ansible playbooks can help you automate failover, re-registration, and synchronization.
For more information, see {AdministeringDocURL}managing-{project-context}-with-ansible[Managing {Project} with Ansible] in _{AdministeringDocTitle}_.

> * For more information on synchronizing repositories, see {ContentManagementDocURL}[Synchronizing repositories] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For more information on synchronizing repositories, see {ContentManagementDocURL}Synchronizing_Repositories_content-management[Synchronizing repositories] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.
```

https://docs.theforeman.org/nightly/Managing_Content/index-katello.html#Synchronizing_Repositories_content-management

> * For more information on synchronizing content between {Project} servers, including ISS, export, and import, see {ContentManagementDocURL}Synchronizing_Content_Between_Servers_content-management[Synchronizing content between {ProjectServer}s] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* For more information on synchronizing content between {ProjectServer}s, including ISS, export, and import, see {ContentManagementDocURL}Synchronizing_Content_Between_Servers_content-management[Synchronizing content between {ProjectServer}s] in _{ContentManagementDocTitle}_.
```
